Javascript is an amazing language, capable of making the Web based UI extremely beautiful. With respect to the amount of customizations that could be done, it is huge. One who is aware of the nitty gritties of the language, would be able to list out quite some advantages to using Javascript. However, this post of mine is not to highlight the advantages of using JS. On the contrary, the issues that I have faceed while using the JS or related framework based applications, either on the Web or on the desktop.

I am talking about the era when the use of JS was minimal. At that point, a simple Google search would result in a list of links to be referred to. Google logo was still the same, a bit less fancy. at that point of time, I was myself studying in college, pursuing my Bachelor Degree. Even when I started my career, in the training we were asked to create full fledged websites. We were using simple MVC, not even Enterprise Beans. By the time I was working on developing Enterprise Applications. The boom of Python was just starting at that point of time. In this period, the main fun was searching. Everything would be fast, even for a slow internet, if someone was looking for a solution for installing "bad" packages for enabling mp4 support and mp3 support in Linux, they would be redirected to some forum, where some kind soul might have detailed the steps to be followed. It was amazing in the sense that it worked. There was no extra baggage included with the sites or pages that one would have liked to visit.

On the contrary, if we take any site for now, it has a thousand JS libraries which gets downloaded and cached. Google Chrome and Firefox became heavy to the extent that one would have to upgrade their system in order to run the browsers properly. Even for now, if we consider the raspberry pi (the credit card sized SBC), it is unable to run all the software at full load. One can argue that the SBC does not have the right amount of resource for running heavy software. I will agree to that, but there is also this part where, the software could have had less bloat. There are quite some number of sites which on opening in such hardware with low resources results in a crash of the software. This was not the case with the softwares which were written quite some time back.

If we take a look at the softwares or the sites built earlier, the information that was to be presented was right infront of the user. The user would not have to click 5 times before removing all the clatter and junk to arrive at the information being served. This is not the case with the softwares we are using today or the sites we are building today. The sites are heavy, to the extent that despite using extremely fast hardware, we still feel that the system is not moving fast enough. 

Then comes the part where text editors are being made in Electron and I have a personal gripe with this text editing software being written using JS. I understand tha GitHub team was trying to build an editor which did not have the same learning curve as that of Vim/Emacs. Howvever, there are far better text editors, Sublime is one such example. These editors written in JS usually is not as handy as one would like them to be. For example, those who have become accustomed to using Visual Studio Code seem to try to download it for every platform they are working on. However, Vim and Emacs are available and pretty good at what they are supposed to do.

In a nut shell, JS can realy help in making great websites, make the user experience more fun. However, that is not the case when everything starts getting built on JS. The reason why C and C++ are still fast is because of the simple fact that they are compiled. Keep things minimal, do one thing and do it very well. Programmers and developers should try to create sites which can be fit in least amount of memory and should be able to run with only of KBs of memory rather than gorging on Gigs of RAM and system resources.